PEP 501: Re-open and revise in consideration of PEP 701 (#3047)
python/peps: pep-0501.txt

PEP: 501
Title: General purpose string template literals
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Nick Coghlan <ncoghlan@gmail.com>, Nick Humrich <nick@humrich.us>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Requires: 498, 675, 701
Created: 08-Aug-2015
Python-Version: 3.12
Post-History: 08-Aug-2015, 23-Aug-2015, 30-Aug-2015

Abstract

> ========

Reviewer: In general, the abstract is intended to be a concise, focused and easy to understand prose summary of what the PEP proposes (and is used by the RSS feeds and downstream tools/platforms as such), and both it and the PEP proper should be self-contained and be usable without directly relying on one another. Conversely, non-trivial background material explaining the issues with the current situation generally belongs in the Motivation section (which is missing here), while an explanation of how the PEP addresses the problem goes in the Rationale and/or Specification section, and examples belong in the spec (if brief/normative) or in a later section.

As it stands, I've been really struggling to understand from the abstract what the PEP is actually proposing, as it is in large part devoted to background material/motivation (which the PEP proper doesn't actually address) while including only a relatively brief mention of the proposed solution that didn't actually explain the basic purpose/function of template strings nor state how it actually solved the described problem, and followed by a list of examples that likewise weren't really helpful to me out of context without an appropriate explanation of what they were intended to accomplish.

Therefore, after applying the other suggested changes, I recommend you:

* Move the first few paragraphs, up until/not including that beginning "To address that problem", to a dedicated `Motivation` section (i.e. before the Proposal section and after the Summary of differences)
* Remove the examples, which are addressed later in the text where they are more appropriate and have sufficient prior explanation to be helpful to the reader
* Rewrite the remaining "To address this problem paragraph" accordingly, and to actually state the purpose and basic proposed behavior of template strings, along the lines of the following:

```rst
Though easy and elegant to use, Python :term:`f-string`\s
can be vulnerable to injection attacks when used to construct
shell commands, SQL queries, HTML snippets and similar
(for example, ``os.system(f"echo {message_from_user}")``).
This PEP introduces template literal strings (or "t-strings"),
which have the same syntax and semantics but with rendering deferred
until :func:`format` or another builder function is called on them.
This will allow standard library calls, helper functions
and third party tools to safety and intelligently perform
appropriate escaping and other string processing on inputs
while retaining same the usability and convenience of f-strings.
```

Reviewer: >  (typo in the last line, though - same doesn't need to be there, I'm guessing it is left over from an earlier iteration of the final sentence)

Thanks, fixed above—as you inferred, it was an editing error

> put a `Background` header between the new abstract and the previous abstract

Or more idiomatically and conventionally per PEP 1 and PEP 12, a `Motivation` section as I suggest above.

:pep:`498` added new syntactic support for string interpolation that is
transparent to the compiler, allow name references from the interpolation
operation full access to containing namespaces (as with any other expression),
rather than being limited to explicit name references. These are referred
to in the PEP as "f-strings" (a mnemonic for "formatted strings").

Since acceptance of the :pep:`498`, f-strings have become well-established and very popular.
F-strings are becoming even more useful with the addition of :pep:`701`.

> While f-string are great, eager rending has its limitations. For example, the eagerness of f-strings

Reviewer 2: Also isn't `rending` intended to be `rendering`?

> While f-string are great, eager rending has its limitations. For example, the eagerness of f-strings

Reviewer: Oops, yup! Good catch; I've edited my above suggestion to fix that too.

PEP: 501

> Title: General purpose string template literals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Title: General purpose template literal strings
```

"Template literal strings" is the phrasing used within the PEP body, and seems to make more sense/be easier to read

the ``os.system`` call.

To address that problem (and a number of other concerns), this PEP proposes
the complementary introduction of "t-strings" (a mnemonic for "template literal strings"),
where ``f"Message with {data}"`` would produce the same
result as ``format(t"Message with {data}")``.

Some possible examples of the proposed syntax::

    mycommand = sh(t"cat {filename}")
    myquery = sql(t"SELECT {column} FROM {table} WHERE column={value};")
    myresponse = html(t"<html><body>{response.body}</body></html>")
    logging.debug(t"Message with {detailed} {debugging} {info}")

While this PEP and :pep:`675` are similar in their goals, neither one competes with the other,
and can instead be used together.

History
=======

This PEP was previously in deferred status, pending further experience with :pep:`498`'s
simpler approach of only supporting eager rendering without the additional
complexity of also supporting deferred rendering. Since then, f-strings have become very popular
and :pep:`701` has been introduced. This PEP has been updated to reflect current knowledge of f-strings,
and improvements from 701. It is designed to be built on top of the :pep:`701` implementation.

> Summary of differences from PEP 498

Reviewer: I had [some similar thoughts in my review](https://github.com/python/peps/pull/3047#discussion_r1133047022), which also discusses some other options for what to do with this.

===================================

The key additions this proposal makes relative to :pep:`498`:

* the "t" (template literal) prefix indicates delayed rendering, but
  otherwise uses the same syntax and semantics as formatted strings
* template literals are available at runtime as a new kind of object
  (``types.TemplateLiteral``)
* the default rendering used by formatted strings is invoked on a
  template literal object by calling ``format(template)`` rather than
  implicitly
* while  f-string ``f"Message {here}"`` would be *semantically* equivalent to
  ``format(t"Message {here}")``, f-strings currently avoid the runtime overhead of using
  the delayed rendering machinery that is needed for t-strings

> NOTE: This proposal spells out a draft API for ``types.TemplateLiteral``

Reviewer: Yeah, I had the [same comment](https://github.com/python/peps/pull/3047#discussion_r1133045901) in my review, and an actual review suggestion that removes it.

the ``os.system`` call.

To address that problem (and a number of other concerns), this PEP proposes
the complementary introduction of "t-strings" (a mnemonic for "template literal strings"),
where ``f"Message with {data}"`` would produce the same
result as ``format(t"Message with {data}")``.

While this PEP and :pep:`675` are similar in their goals, neither one competes with the other,
and can instead be used together.

This PEP was previously in deferred status, pending further experience with :pep:`498`'s
simpler approach of only supporting eager rendering without the additional
complexity of also supporting deferred rendering. Since then, f-strings have become very popular
and :pep:`701` has been introduced. This PEP has been updated to reflect current knowledge of f-strings,
and improvements from 701. It is designed to be built on top of the :pep:`701` implementation.

Summary of differences from f-strings

> =====================================

Reviewer: I'm not sure this really fits here, after the motivation but before the actual proposal. I'd suggest making this a subsection at the end of the `Proposal` section, since it fits best there as a summary of the proposal, and the text at the end of the current proposal section leads right into it.

            self.format_specifiers = format_specifiers
            return self

        def __add__(self, other):
            if isinstance(other, TemplateLiteral):

>                 if self.parsed_template and self.parsed_template[-1][1] is None and other.parsed_template:

Author: I believe everything is handled: I added some test cases here:
https://gist.github.com/nhumrich/9faffb66c368f03971abf90d6e9cb042

Also, updated the class to have an `__eq__` for comparisons.

                    self.field_values,
                    self.format_specifiers)
                )
            else:
                raise TypeError(f"unsupported operand type(s) for +: 'TemplateLiteral' and '{type(other)}'")

        def __radd__(self, other):
            if isinstance(other, str):
                if self.parsed_template:
                    new_parsed_template = ((other + self.parsed_template[0][0], self.parsed_template[0][1]),)
                                          + self.parsed_template[1:]
                else:
                    new_parsed_template = ((other, None),)

                return TemplateLiteral(
                   other + self.raw_template,
                   new_parsed_template,
                   self.field_values,
                   self.format_specifiers)
                )
            else:
                raise TypeError(f"unsupported operand type(s) for +: '{type(other)}' and 'TemplateLiteral'")

        def __mul__(self, other):
            if isinstance(other, int):
                if other < 1:
                    return TemplateLiteral("", (), (), ())
                final = self
                for _ in range(1, int):

>                     final = final + self

Author: Awesome. Works great!

use case specific renderers that take care of quoting interpolated values
appropriately for the relevant security context::

    runquery(sql(t"SELECT {column} FROM {table} WHERE column={value};"))
    runcommand(sh(t"cat {filename}"))
    return_response(html(t"<html><body>{response.body}</body></html>"))

This PEP does not cover adding all such renderers to the standard library
immediately (though one for shell escaping is proposed), but rather proposes to ensure that they can be readily provided by
third party libraries, and potentially incorporated into the standard library
at a later date.

It is proposed that a renderer is included in the `shlex` module, aimed to offer a POSIX shell style experience for
accessing external programs, without the significant risks posed by running
``os.system`` or enabling the system shell when using the ``subprocess`` module

> APIs, which will provide an interface for running external programs similar to that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
APIs, which will provide an interface for running external programs inspired by that
```

(I realised we should soften the wording a bit here, as Julia's backticks offer full shell command pipeline support, which `shlex.sh` won't do. While you *could* build pipeline support atop template strings by also parsing the non-expression pieces, `shlex.sh` won't be going that far).

==========================================
As a reference implementation, a renderer for safe POSIX shell escaping can be added to the ``shlex``
module. This renderer would be called ``sh`` and would be equivalent of calling ``shlex.quote`` on
each field value in the template literal.:

  os.system(shlex.sh(t'cat {myfile}'))

would have the same behavior as::

  os.system('cat ' + shlex.quote(myfile)))

The implementation would be::

  def sh(template: TemplateLiteral):
      return template.render(render_field=quote)

Changes to subprocess module
============================

With the additional renderer in the shlex module, and the addition of template literals,
the subprocess module can be changed to handle accepting template literal
as an additional input type to ``Popen``, as it already accepts a sequence, or a string,
with different behavior for each.
With the addition of template literals, ``subprocess.Popen`` (and in return, all its higher level functions such as ``run``)
could accept a string in a more safe way.
For example::

  subprocess.run(t'cat {myfile}', shell=True)

would automatically use the ``shlex.sh`` renderer provided in this PEP. Therefore, using shlex

> inside a t-string like so::

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
inside a `subprocess.run` call like so::
```

Reviewer: Fix syntax mistake (bad backticks):

```suggestion
inside a ``subprocess.run`` call like so::
```

Also fixed it directly in your comment, just to be sure

Reviewer 3: I suspect I'm far from alone in that being the main Markdown habit I find hard to break when writing ReST instead :)

>   subprocess.run(shlex.sh(t'cat {myfile}'))

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  subprocess.run(shlex.sh(t'cat {myfile}'), shell=True)
```

> would be irrelevant, as ``run`` would automatically render any template literals through ``shlex.sh``

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
would be redundant, as ``run`` would automatically render any template literals through ``shlex.sh``
```

> Alternatively, when ``subprocess.Popen`` is ran without ``shell=True``, it could still provide

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Alternatively, when ``subprocess.Popen`` is run without ``shell=True``, it could still provide
```

subprocess with a more ergonomic syntax. For example::

  subprocess.run(t'cat {myfile} --flag {value}')

would be equivalent to::

>   subprocess.run(['cat', shlex.quote(myfile), '--flag', shlex.quote(value)])

Reviewer 4: It seems wrong. For example:

``` python
>>> myfile = 'file name'
>>> open(myfile, 'wb').close()
>>> subprocess.run(['cat', shlex.quote(myfile)])
cat: "'file name'": No such file or directory
```

IMO this line

``` python
subprocess.run(t'cat {myfile} --flag {value}')
```

should be equivalent to:

``` python
subprocess.run(shlex.split(f'cat {shlex.quote(myfile)} --flag {shlex.quote(value)}'))
```

and:

``` python
subprocess.run(['cat', myfile, '--flag', value])
```

Author: hmm, this example is a good one. It seems you are right. I will adjust the pep.

> It would do this by first using the ``shlex.sh`` renderer, as above, then using ``shlex.split`` afterwords.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It would do this by first using the ``shlex.sh`` renderer, as above, then using ``shlex.split`` on the result.
```

use case specific renderers that take care of quoting interpolated values
appropriately for the relevant security context::

    runquery(sql(t"SELECT {column} FROM {table} WHERE column={value};"))
    runcommand(sh(t"cat {filename}"))
    return_response(html(t"<html><body>{response.body}</body></html>"))

This PEP does not cover adding all such renderers to the standard library
immediately (though one for shell escaping is proposed), but rather proposes to ensure that they can be readily provided by
third party libraries, and potentially incorporated into the standard library
at a later date.

It is proposed that a renderer is included in the :mod:`shlex` module, aimed to offer a POSIX shell style experience for
accessing external programs, without the significant risks posed by running
``os.system`` or enabling the system shell when using the ``subprocess`` module
APIs, which will provide an interface for running external programs inspired by that
offered by the
`Julia programming language <https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/manual/running-external-programs/>`__,
only with the backtick based ``\`cat $filename\``` syntax replaced by
``t"cat {filename}"`` style template literals.

> See more in the :ref:`501-Shlex-Module` section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See more in the :ref:`501-shlex-module` section.
```

Likewise, style convention is lower kebab case

Unmatched braces::

  >>> t'x={x'
    File "<stdin>", line 1

>         t'x={x'
>            ^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Something evidently went wrong with the suggestion application, and this got added twice

        t'x={x'
           ^
  SyntaxError: missing '}' in template literal expression

Invalid expressions::

  >>> t'x={!x}'
    File "<fstring>", line 1
      !x
      ^
  SyntaxError: invalid syntax

Run time errors occur when evaluating the expressions inside a
template string before creating the template literal object. See :pep:`498`
for some examples.

Different renderers may also impose additional runtime
constraints on acceptable interpolated expressions and other formatting
details, which will be reported as runtime exceptions.

> .. _501-Shlex-Module:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _501-shlex-module:
```

Minor style nit, but ref target labels are typically `lower-kebab-case` by convention

Renderer for shell escaping added to shlex
==========================================

As a reference implementation, a renderer for safe POSIX shell escaping can be added to the :mod:`shlex`
module. This renderer would be called ``sh`` and would be equivalent to calling ``shlex.quote`` on
each field value in the template literal.

Thus::

  os.system(shlex.sh(t'cat {myfile}'))

would have the same behavior as::

  os.system('cat ' + shlex.quote(myfile)))

The implementation would be::

  def sh(template: TemplateLiteral):
      return template.render(render_field=quote)

Changes to subprocess module
============================

With the additional renderer in the shlex module, and the addition of template literals,
the :mod:`subprocess` module can be changed to handle accepting template literals
as an additional input type to ``Popen``, as it already accepts a sequence, or a string,
with different behavior for each.

> With the addition of template literals, :func:`subprocess.Popen` (and in return, all its higher level functions such as :func:`~subprocess.run`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the addition of template literals, :class:`subprocess.Popen` (and in return, all its higher level functions such as :func:`~subprocess.run`)
```

Oops, this is a class rather than a function—my mistake

defined for "lazy evaluation" of interpolated fields, as the ``logging``
module's existing delayed interpolation support provides access to
`various attributes <https://docs.python.org/3/library/logging.html#logrecord-attributes>`__ of the event ``LogRecord`` instance.

For example, since template literal expressions are arbitrary Python expressions,
string literals could be used to indicate cases where evaluation itself is
being deferred, not just rendering::

    logging.debug(t"Logger: {'record.name'}; Event: {event}; Details: {data}")

This could be further extended with idioms like using inline tuples to indicate
deferred function calls to be made only if the log message is actually
going to be rendered at current logging levels::

    logging.debug(t"Event: {event}; Details: {expensive_call, raw_data}")

This kind of approach would be possible as having access to the actual *text*
of the field expression would allow the logging renderer to distinguish
between inline tuples that appear in the field expression itself, and tuples
that happen to be passed in as data values in a normal field.

Comparison to PEP 675
=====================

> This PEP is similar in its goals as :pep:`675`.

Reviewer 3: Missing empty line after the heading

Reviewer: Fixed in [my suggestion](https://github.com/python/peps/pull/3047#discussion_r1133055639) BTW, along with other fixes

While both are attempting to provide a way to have safer code, they are doing so in different ways.

> :pep:`675` provides a way to find potential security issues as a static analysis.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
:pep:`675` provides a way to find potential security issues via static analysis.
```

It does so by providing a way for the type checker to flag sections of code that are using
dynamic strings incorrectly. This requires a user to actually run a static analysis type checker such as mypy.

If :pep:`675` tells you that you are violating a type check, it is up to the programmer to know how to handle the dynamic-ness of the string.

> This PEP provides a safe alternative to f-strings at runtime.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This PEP provides a safer alternative to f-strings at runtime.
```

(Best to avoid absolute terms, as you can technically still get shell escapes and similar problems when using t-strings. It's just not going to happen in the main rendering step anymore)

If a user recieves a type-error, changing an existing f-string into a t-string could be an easy way to solve the problem.

t-strings create safer code by correctly escaping the dynamic sections of strings, while maintaining the static portions.

This PEP also allows a way for a library/codebase to be safe, but it does so at runtime rather than
only during static analysis. For example, if a library wanted to ensure "only safe strings", it
could check that the type of object passed in at runtime is a template literal.::

    def my_safe_function(string_like_object):
        if not isinstance(string_like_object, types.TemplateLiteral):
            raise TypeError("Argument 'string_like_object' must be a t-string")

The two PEPs could also be used together by typing your function as accepting either a string literal or a template literal.
This way, your function can provide the same api for both static strings, and dynamic strings.

    def my_safe_function(string_like_object: LiteralString | TemplateLiteral):

Discussion
==========

> Refer to :pep:`498` for additional discussion, as several of the points there

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to :pep:`498` for previous discussion, as several of the points there
```

This was many years ago, so use a more appropriate word

also apply to this PEP.

Support for binary interpolation
--------------------------------

> As :pep:`498` does not handle byte strings, neither will this one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As f-strings don't handle byte strings, neither will t-strings.
```

Use the far more widely known implemented feature name rather than the historical PEP number

This PEP provides a safer alternative to f-strings at runtime.
If a user recieves a type-error, changing an existing f-string into a t-string could be an easy way to solve the problem.

t-strings enable safer code by correctly escaping the dynamic sections of strings, while maintaining the static portions.

This PEP also allows a way for a library/codebase to be safe, but it does so at runtime rather than
only during static analysis. For example, if a library wanted to ensure "only safe strings", it
could check that the type of object passed in at runtime is a template literal::

    def my_safe_function(string_like_object):
        if not isinstance(string_like_object, types.TemplateLiteral):
            raise TypeError("Argument 'string_like_object' must be a t-string")

The two PEPs could also be used together by typing your function as accepting either a string literal or a template literal.
This way, your function can provide the same API for both static and dynamic strings::

    def my_safe_function(string_like_object: LiteralString | TemplateLiteral):

>         ...
>         ...
> 
> Discussion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        ...

Discussion
```

Likewise, seems like something went a little wrong here and added this twice.

functions. Creating a rich descriptive object with a useful default renderer
made it much easier to support customisation of the semantics of interpolation.

> Building atop PEP 701 rather than competing with PEP 498
> --------------------------------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Building atop f-strings rather than replacing them
--------------------------------------------------
```

It doesn't really make sense to "compete" with a PEP that was accepted and implemented nearly a decade ago. Furthermore, use the human-readible, modern feature names rather than historic PEP numbers, and avoid any confusion as to the relationship of the two other PEPs named.

Earlier versions of this PEP attempted to serve as a complete substitute for

> :pep:`498` . With the introduction of 701, this pep can now build a more flexible delayed

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
:pep:`498` . With the previous acceptance of :pep:`498` and the more recent introduction of :pep:`701`, this PEP instead now builds a more flexible delayed
```

Reviewer: I proposed an [alternate suggestion](https://github.com/python/peps/pull/3047#discussion_r1133057061) that incorporates most of these changes as well as other fixes.

Reviewer 3: Hmm, I need to work out how to tell Github I want to make a multi-line suggestion...

Reviewer: Move your mouse to the first/last line you want to select until you see a blue plus sign...

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/17051931/224484953-701f069f-df33-4834-ac05-36bc129a3b90.png)

Then, click and drag over the lines you want:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/17051931/224485012-15c3e788-124f-4242-97bc-493d2b7205c5.png)

Finally, release and boom you've got a multi-line comment

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/17051931/224485036-2e6f9375-73d2-49be-8672-220683705732.png)

You can also do it by clicking the starting line number and <kbd>Shift</kbd>-clicking the ending line number to select multiple lines, then clicking the plus icon next to the second line number.

See [GitHub's release blog post](https://github.blog/changelog/2020-04-15-multi-line-code-suggestions-general-availability/) and the [GitHub documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/reviewing-changes-in-pull-requests/commenting-on-a-pull-request#adding-line-comments-to-a-pull-request) for more details.

> :pep:`498` . With the introduction of 701, this pep can now build a more flexible delayed
> rendering capability on top of :pep:`498` and :pep:`701`'s eager rendering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:pep:`498` (f-strings) . With the acceptance of that PEP and the more recent :pep:`701`,
this PEP can now build a more flexible delayed rendering capability
on top of the existing f-string eager rendering.
```

* Fix multiple grammar and phrasing issues
* Avoid repeating the PEPs over and over and instead refer to the feature names

* :pep:`498`: Literal string formatting

* :pep:`675`: Arbitrary Literal String Type

* :pep:`701`: Syntactic formalization of f-strings

* `FormattableString and C# native string interpolation
  <https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/tokens/interpolated>`_

* `IFormattable interface in C# (see remarks for globalization notes)
  <https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.iformattable>`_

* `TemplateLiterals in Javascript
  <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Template_literals>`_

* `Running external commands in Julia
  <https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/manual/running-external-programs/>`_

> 

Reviewer: I can't quite reach it with a comment, but since @ncoghlan and @nhumrich are the only substantive contributors to the current PEP, I suggest you agree to revise the copyright statement following our modern requirements:

```rst
This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
```
